---
layout: page
title: Project 1 - Meet the Members
page_order: 0
parent: Projects
grand_parent: Overview - iOS
description: MDB iOS TP - Project 1
---

# Project 1: Meet the Member
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

Due: **Friday 09/24/2021** at **11:59 PM**

# Project Description

Welcome to MDB! This semester, we’ll have over 50 members, including a new recruit class of 18 of the brightest minds on campus. What better way to get to know everyone in the club than to build an app about them? We’ll be building a simple, multiple-choice trivia game to see how fast you can learn everyone’s names.

This is a solo project.

# Setup

The following commands will assume that you have finished the git setup in demo 1. If you haven't done so, please first follow the set up instructions [here](/ios/demos/1/#setup) before moving on.

Navigate to your local MDB iOS TP repo
```text
cd <path to the local repo>
```
and run
```shell
git pull starter fa21/students/main
```
As always, if a merge window appears, you can use `:wq` to save and exit the editor (assuming that you are using `vim`).

Verify that the repo has a folder named `Meet the Members`.  Double click on the `Meet the Member.xcodeproj` file in the folder to open the project in Xcode.

Throughout the project, we encourage you to commit often, so that you can revert to a prior commit if needed. Commits are usually broken down into functionality. So even if it's just a few lines, it might be worth to commit.

# Spec

## Requirements

For this project, you will be using Auto Layout to design each screen. That means you should be adding constraints instead of using frame for your layout. **For this project, you are not allowed to use interface builder (storyboard).**

All screens must be designed well.

Note that the design of this application is entirely up to you, but make it look as clean as possible. See examples of trivia apps on the App Store for further inspiration.

Also note that this spec does not specify all of the smaller details that would make this a complete app. For example, the spec doesn’t require back buttons, but adding back buttons would make the app much easier to use. Build it in a way that would make you actually want to use it, and don’t make it “hacky” just because the spec doesn’t require something.

## Start Screen

- A screen with a button that says start. Upon pressing the button, the user is taken to the main screen.

## Main Screen

- **Member Picture**: Randomly display a picture of a member on the screen.
- **Name Options**: Display four options below the picture as buttons, each with different names that may correspond to the picture (one of the names should actually be correct, but the others can be random – be sure you don’t randomly also select the correct answer)
- **Score**: Display a score count for the user – when the user correctly answers, increase the score by 1. Otherwise, just move on to the next question.
- **Answer Display**: You can go from one question to another just by changing the image and button values, but there should be a two second delay in between questions where the button the user pressed flashes either red or green (depending on whether they’re correct or not).
- **Timer**: Have a timer that limits the user to 5 seconds to answer the question. If they take up the full 5 seconds, the question is counted as incorrect. The user should have 2 seconds to read the correct answer before the next question is displayed. The 2 seconds count down will start when
    - The user tap a answer, whether that's correct or not, or
    - The 5 seconds countdown ends, whichever comes first
- **Pause Button**: When the main screen is first loaded, display a pause button. This button should display “Pause” when the game is running. When clicked on, the game should pause, and the pause button should change its display to “Resume.” When clicked on again, the game should unpause, and the score should reset. Additionally, the game should automatically pause if the user goes to a different screen.

## Statistics Screen

- **Statistics View**: Add a statistics icon. If the user clicks on this, the game should pause (if currently playing) and the screen should present a window that displays the following statistics:
    - Longest streak of correct answers
    - Result of last three questions (or less if not answered yet)

## Extra Credit

For 10pt of extra credits on MP1 (So the maximum possible is 110pt). Use an animated progress bar on the top of the screen to indicate the 5 seconds countdown. The progress bar should start empty and advance to the next level at the end of each second. The progress bar should be able to maintain at whatever its state {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} was during the 2 seconds countdown after the answer is displayed.

# Debugging

This video will walk you through some of the common types of error that you will encounter, and general guidelines on how to debug in Xcode.

<div class="video-wrapper">
<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/A6PxoXmp7SI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

# Submission

Save all of the files in your project (easiest way to do that is just building/running it), and add them to the staging area 
```shell
git add -A
```
Commit the changes to git 
```shell
git commit -m "[Your commit message]"
```
When that's all done, push the local commits to Github 
```shell
git push
```
Recall that because we set up the branch tracking for our local `main`, we don't have to explicitly say `git push origin main`

Finally, submit your project to [Gradescope](https://www.gradescope.com)
