---
layout: page
title: MP3B - MDB Social
page_order: 4
parent: Projects
grand_parent: Overview - iOS
description: MDB iOS TP - Mini Project 3B
---

# Mini-Project 3: MDB Social Part B
{: .no_toc }

##
# Introduction

For this project we will continue to work on the MDB Social app from last week. Recall that in part A we implemented a sign up screen and a feed screen that display all of the events. This week we will focus on displaying the social details and event creation.

# Setup

There's no setup needed for this project. You will work on the same project you have for part A.

# Spec

## Requirement

See requirements for [MP3A](/ios/projects/2/#requirements)

## Creating an Event

- Display a plus button on FeedVC that allows the user to create a new social.

- When the user creates a new social, they should be required to fill out the following:
    - Name of event
    - Picture - allow them to open up the default camera to take a picture or to upload from camera roll. (Hint: [UIImagePickerController](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/uiimagepickercontroller))
    - Description (up to 140 characters)
    - Date - start date of the event including day and time

- When the user taps create, the event image needs be uploaded to Firebase Storage, then use the image url and other input to create a new event document on Firestore.

- Because we need to be able to efficiently download and display the images in FeedVC, we've set the maximum upload image size to 1MB. So you will likely need to [resize and/or compress your image](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43256005/swift-ios-reduce-image-size-before-upload) before uploading to Firebase Storage. 

## Detail View

- When the user taps on a social, they should be taken to another screen with an expanded view of the same details from the `FeedVC`, in addition to the description of the social.

- Display a button allowing the user to RSVP to the event. When the user has already RSVPed to the event, the button should allow the user to cancel it.

- If the user is the owner of the event, the detail view should also display a delete button allowing them to remove the event.
