---
layout: page
title: Project 3B - MDB Social
page_order: 3
parent: Projects
grand_parent: Overview - iOS
description: MDB iOS TP - Project 3B
---

# Project 3B: MDB Social
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

Due: **Saturday 04/09/2022** at **11:59 PM**  
Hard Cutoff **Saturday 04/16/2022** at **11:59 PM**

# Introduction

This week we will continue our work on the MDB Social app. In part A we implemented a sign up screen and a feed screen that shows us all the events. This week we will add a few finishing touch to the feed screen, and focus on displaying the social details and event creation.

# Setup

You will be work on the same code base from last time.

# Spec

## Requirements

You are allowed to use storyboards. Though we still strongly recommend you create most of your UI programmatically.

As always, good quality design is an expectation. Feel free to look at existing apps for inspiration. We will especially be looking for great design on this project so once you finish, please spend time improving your design.

Make sure your code is clean and easily readable. See [this](https://github.com/raywenderlich/swift-style-guide) for a Swift style guide.

## Creating an Event

- Add a button on the FeedVC that takes the user to a social creation page.

- Upon creating a new social, the user should be prompted to fill out the following:
    - Name of event
    - A picture for the event page. You will need to implement the UI that allows users to take a picture from their camera or to upload one from their library. The easiest way to do this is through a `UIImagePickerController` ([Apple Documentation](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/uiimagepickercontroller) \| [Hacking With Swift Tutorial](https://www.hackingwithswift.com/read/10/4/importing-photos-with-uiimagepickercontroller)) 
    - A short description of the event (up to 140 characters)
    - The start and end time of the event. This needs to include both the date and time down to the minute, which can be done using a `UIDatePicker` ([Apple Documentation](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/uidatepicker)). Make sure to try out a few `preferredDatePickerStyle` to see which one works best for you!

- When the user taps create, we need to stores all the information to Firebase so that others can access. However, as we mentioned, Cloud Firestore doesn't support storing large media files such as images or videos. For that, we will have to use Firebase Storage ([Documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/storage?authuser=0)). It can be found on the left panel under the storage tab of [Firebase console](https://console.firebase.google.com/project/mdb-social-sp21/overview). Functionality wise, Firebase Storage allow us to upload files that can be accessed through static links later on. Therefore for us, in terms of Firebase interaction, event creation will include roughly two steps: 
    - Upload the image to Firebase storage and receive a URL for the image.
    - Use the URL to construct an `Event` object and add the event to Firestore.

- As a FYI, because we need to be able to efficiently download the images in FeedVC, we've set the maximum upload image size to 1MB. So you will likely need to [resize and/or compress your image](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43256005/swift-ios-reduce-image-size-before-upload) before uploading to Firebase Storage.

## Feed Live Update

- When another user creates a new event, the feed screen should automatically update. (You won't have to do much if you are already using the right API from Cloud Firestore)

## Detail View

- When the user taps on a social, they should be taken to another screen with an expanded view of the same details from the `FeedVC`, in addition to the description of the social.

- Display a button allowing the user to RSVP to the event. When the user has already RSVPed to the event, the button should allow the user to cancel it.

- If the user is the owner of the event, the detail view should also display a delete button allowing them to remove the event.

# Submission

Save all of the files in your project, commit, and push to Github.

Finally, submit your project to [Gradescope](https://www.gradescope.com)