---
layout: page
title: Lesson 3
page_order: 3
parent: Lessons
grand_parent: Overview - iOS
description: Data Persistence and Authentication 
---
# Data Persistence and Authentication
{: .no_toc }
*Michael Lin*

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

# Closures

Today we will start by talking about closures, a topic that was brought up many times yet there is still quite a bit for us to discover.

## Escaping Closures

When you define a closure in Swift, the information that you will use inside the closure usually comes from two places: the *parameters* which are the values that were passed in, plus the *context* which is all the variables accessible to you when the closure is defined.

```swift
var sum = 0
[1, 2, 3, 4].forEach { num in sum += num }
```
In the example above, `num` is a parameter and `sum` is a piece of the context.

This allows us to carry out much more complex operations than would've been able to if closures can only use what's passed in as parameters.

However, the mechanism introduces some interesting challenges when a closure needs to outlive the scope where it was defined. A common use case for that is `completion`. We learned about completion last lesson as a way of adding "after effect" to a asynchronous block, such as putting our asynchronously loaded image into `self.imageView`.

<div style="width: 90%; margin: auto;">
<iframe width="90%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5V90-TzPdqU?start=812" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

Despite our last example, completion closures appear much more frequently as the argument of a function rather than a local variable, such as `UIView.animate(withDuration:animation:completion:)` or `URLSession.shared.dataTask(with:completionHandler:)`.

The closures associated with these asynchronous completions have a special name: *escaping closures*. Specifically, an escaping closure is a closure that's called after the function it passes to returns. For instance, since functions such as `UIView.animate` are asynchronous, the completion can be called long after the original function returns. In short, an escaping closure *outlives* the function it was passed to.

Closures are *non-escaping* by default, unless they are declared as `@escaping` in the function's definition
```swift
func loadUser(with uid: String, completion: @escaping (User)->Void) {}
```

or if the closure is optional
```swift
func loadUser(with uid: String, completion: ((User)->Void)? = nil) {}
```

Optional closures in parameters are escaping by default. 

## Capturing and Reference Cycle

For the most part, or at least in the scope of this training program, you probably won't find yourself in the need of using the `@escaping` syntax. However, you will have to deal with functions that use an escaping closure as a parameter, and this is when the knowledge about escaping closures will come in handy.

Since arguments of a function only exist during the function call, and instance properties only live as far as the instance goes, if we decide to use these variables in an escaping closure, we need a way of guaranteeing that they will still be there when the closure is called. Therefore, by default, in an escaping closure, a set *strong references* to these variables are maintained. This is known as **capturing**.

A escaping closure implicitly captures the context that is used inside the closure so that when the closure is evoked, it has the references it needs to finish the execution.

```swift
{ image in
    self.imageView.image = image
}
```
Here, `self` is implicitly captured with the closure to ensure that we can get to `self.imageView` as long as the closure exists.

You can made this behavior explicit by defining a *capture list*. It's a list of objects you wish to be captured from the current context.

```swift
{ [self] image in
    self.imageView.image = image
}
```

But because `self` is captured with a strong reference, it will not be deallocated by the ARC so long as our closure exist, which, in a certain scenario, can create a reference cycle. This video will show you an example of that using a `Timer` instance inside a view controller.

<div style="width: 90%; margin: auto;">
<iframe width="90%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-T_Kp6-RRDM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

# Interacting with API

*Application Programing Interface* (API) is a portal to another application. It allows us to work with other programs while maintaining a layer of abstraction - an API does something without you having to worry about the implementation details.

The most common type of APIs are the web APIs, where the *client* send an HTTP request to a *server*, who will then process the request, and return an HTTP response.

An HTTP request can be broken down to several components:
- **URL**: Specify where the data is located
- **Request Method** (GET, POST, etc.): Specify how you will get the data
- **Request Header**: Provide the request context such as *user agent* (UA)
- **Optional Request Body**: Can be JSON, XML, plain text, etc

In response, the server will send an HTTP response that has
- **Status Code**, some examples:
    - **200**: Status OK
    - **301**: Moved permanently
    - **404**: Error not found
    - **400**: Bad request
    - **502**: Internal Server Error
- **Response Headers**: Metadata about the body
- **Response Body**: The response payload, can be JSON, XML, Plain Text, etc

## Using URLSession

In Swift, you can send requests to a Web API using the `URLSession` class from the `Foundation` framework. This video will walk you through the basics using a simple demo.

<div style="width: 90%; margin: auto;">
<iframe width="90%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CR-_-un3toQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

In Project 3, you will build a social media app using Firebase, a platform developed by Google. Through Firebase APIs, you will have access to database, authentication server, media storage, and a lot more. Although we will not be using their Web APIs - Firebase offers iOS Software Development Kit (SDK) so we can call their APIs natively in Swift - the ideas and principles are pretty much the same.
